
Canon Laser Printer Notes
=========================

These are my working notes for the development of the custom Canon laser printer
controller, and will eventually document the completed implementation.


Background
----------

Three Rivers jumped on the early Canon LBP-10 and offered it as the "PLP-10,"
or "PERQ Laser Printer", at a list price of $18,000 (in 1981/82).  This was the
first 240dpi "wet process" behemoth that weighed a ton and took up a whole desk
or tabletop, but it cranked out around 6-8 pages per minute of text or graphics
(screen dumps) almost silently, compared to the typical clattering daisy-wheel
or dot-matrix printers popular at the time.  Plus they networked it, so a PERQ
acting as a print server could spool up output from any machine on the Ethernet.
This was slicker 'n snot at the time.

Later the software was extended to support the 300dpi LBP-CX.  There are hints
that 3RCC OEM'ed a CX-based printer but I've never seen any marketing materials,
price lists, or memos that explicitly confirm it.  Since the interface uses the
same 37-pin "video" interface it was a fairly simple upgrade.  I'd love to know
if anyone out there remembers, or has, a PERQ-branded Canon CX printer!


References
----------

There are a number of documents or information sources to familiarize yourself
with the Canon laser printer interface and the PERQ implementation as it is
emulated by PERQemu.

The primary source of information about the Canon side of the interface:
    Docs/Hardware Reverences/LBP-CX_Series_Video_Interface_Service_Manual.pdf

The Canon CX Series Service Manual (Bitsavers) is also interesting as it mostly
confirms (and sometimes contradicts) the Video Interface manual.  Sigh.

PERQ references:
    T2_schems_Vol2_Feb85.pdf - OIO-003 schematics (has a few errors) :-(
    Numerous copies of the Canon "layered" software repository (tape archives)
    Pinout of the laser printer cable (toned out and documented below)

Full source code to the POS and Accent microcode (through V5.0, 1986) and Pascal
library and utilities is available.  Additionally, the original code to generate
the CN100/CN200 PROMs has allowed the controller state machine to be reverse-
engineered.  These items may/will eventually be made available in the PERQmedia
repo or included in disks bundled with PERQemu.


User Interface
--------------

Software exists for just about every possible hardware configuration and OS.
We have sources for POS G and Accent; I have confirmed that it also compiles
(with minor modifications) on POS F!  It's not clear which PNX release first
introduced Canon support, as memos from around 1983-84 suggest that it was not
yet included, but it seems it was present in PNX 5.  Because this emulation is
at the register/microcode level, it should Just Work if/when we get later
versions of PNX running.

The two printer models are easily distinguished by their resolution:  240 dpi
for the LBP-10, or 300 dpi for the LBP-CX.  Currently a Settings command is
used to set the default resolution/model, which means that any configuration
that includes the OIO/Canon will use the same definition.  It could be made a
Configuration option in the future.

The PERQemu Configurator currently allows the Canon option to be enabled when
the OIO board is selected, valid for any configuration.  It's also the "L" in
MLO (Multibus/Laser Option) so it will eventually be available for PERQ-2
models that configure MLO in place of the OIO.  As far as the operating system
is concerned, microcode and Pascal library support don't seem to differentiate
between board types as far as the software interface is concerned, so it should
Just Work.

Canon's printer documentation lists four different paper cassette sizes, so the
CLI has options to set the default size.  Note, however, that none of the PERQ
software seems to allow for specifying the paper size -- everything seems to
assume US Letter regardless of what's installed.  I'll assume for now that the
same settings worked well enough for A4 paper in ICL supported PERQs.

Output is directed to the default output directory (can be changed in Settings)
with the (fixed) file naming pattern "LBP-{10,CX}_nnn.ext", where the extension
is either ".png" or ".tif".  The page number is remembered between invocations
of PERQemu.  Other formats may be made available in the future, and the output
file naming pattern might be made configurable.

The emulator will provide an activity "light" (like the floppy and streamer
icons) to show when the Canon is active.  This is to provide visual feedback
that the printer is active, since there's no click, whirr or hint of ozone in
the air from having a real printer spitting out pages.  A future enhancement to
add a "default print device" could allow completed Canon output to be sent to
a print queue on the local host as each page completes!

Once configured, all interaction with the Canon is through the available PERQ
software.  The User Guide will be updated to provide additional information.


Controller Emulation
--------------------

The emulator is split into two parts, like the streamer tape implementation: a
controller that is managed by the microcode, and a simulation of the printer
with all of its mechanical timings.

The PERQ side of the interface is in IO/Printers/CanonController.cs.  It is
attached to the OIO board when the Canon option is selected in a configuration.
The two Settings options CanonResolution and CanonPaperSize are consulted to set
the model and paper size.  It comprises a set of control/status registers, a
small set of IO addresses (part of the OIO board's decoder logic shared with
other OIO peripherals), a clock oscillator and reset circuit, and a 16-byte FIFO
that lets the DMA controller pump quad words from memory into it in parallel,
while shifting the bits out serially to create the "video style bitstream" that
reproduces the bitmap on the printed page.  A band counter and state machine
drives the physical interface to the print engine through a Canonical (:-) set
of line drivers connected to the I/O bulkhead.  For PERQ-1 this is through the
"IO Option" 50-pin connector, which requires a split "Y" cable to break out the
Ethernet AUI from the Canon interface.  For PERQ-Tx models, a dedicated 25-pin
connector on the bulkhead is built-in.  Physical connection to the printer is
through a 25-pin to 37-pin cable (pinout below).  

The state machine is implemented in hardware as a set of registers and two
PROMs, labeled CN100 and CN200.  The CN100 contains logic mostly devoted to
reading status bits back from the printer; CN200 drives the output side, DMA
transfers, and interrupts.  It handles timing of the video signals for each
horizontal line output to the printer, which are delivered as "bands" of up
to 8 scan lines at a time rendered by software into memory buffers.  Operation
of the state machine is from reverse-engineering the code itself, examining the
microcode and Pascal sources which drive it, and studying the (somewhat error-
prone) available schematic of the interface.


Printer Emulation
-----------------

The other half of the implementation is in IO/Printers/CanonPrinter.cs.  This
simulates the mechanical part, including capturing the data from the PERQ and
converting the resulting bitmap into an output file in a format the user can
specify (Settings.CanonFormat).

Documentation for the Canon video interface is, thankfully, provided -- although
it is seriously vague and lacking in some specifics that makes implementation
much more difficult than it ought to be (discussion below).  At a high level,
the "video interface" is like that of a bitmapped display, essentially scanning
one bitmapped "frame" to the marking engine to produce the image one line at a
time.  There are margins surrounding the visible (printable) area on the page,
much like the front porch/back porch in a video signal.  What is conspicuously
lacking is a concrete description of how an "end of page" condition is detected.
More on this below.

To emulate the PERQ interface, it's important to note that the Canon command/
status protocol is NOT fully implemented in the hardware.  The bi-directional
"SC" and "SCLK" pins are wired as inputs only; the hardware handshake of the
PRNT/RDY lines starts a print operation and none of the supplemental commands
or status requests are available.  As documented by Three Rivers in the source
code, the mechanical status bits are NOT available to the client software.  For
the purposes of emulation, this means:

    The Canon will never jam, is never turned off, never needs toner or
    suffers mechanical breakdowns, and only runs out of paper if you 
    enable "accurate" emulation mode.  It can also print much faster
    than the 8.1 pages per minute the engine is rated for if the rate
    limiting setting PrinterSpeed is turned off.

Some ideas and notes about future enhancements is included below.


Output
------

Two custom output formatters are now included in Printers/CanonFormatter.cs.
Rather than hassle with SDL (which doesn't easily handle 1bpp bitmaps anymore)
or require libgdi+ as a dependency on Mac/Linux to use System.Drawing, PERQemu
now generates true 1bpp PNG or TIFF images directly, with some additional meta-
data tags purely for fun.  One advantage of this scheme is that the bitmap data
comes directly from PERQ memory as quad words, unaltered; it does NOT require
conversion to 8- or 32-bit SDL textures and keeps memory usage very low (about
1.1MB/page during rendering).

    Note: the output of custom bitmaps is useful enough that the interface
    is being extended to support the notion of a generic "page" of output,
    which can be linked together to form multi-page output files for formats
    that support it (currently TIFF, but possibly direct PDF writing someday).
    This will allow direct capture of screenshots from the emulator and other
    simulated printers to use the same output abstraction in the future.



Theory of Operation
-------------------

There are two primary ways to print a page on the Canon:  use CPrint (a network-
capable print spooler) to render a text file, or Screendump to dump the contents
of the video frame.  Other applications (like DP, the Drawing Program) may have
built-in output support for things like graphics.  More investigation is needed
to identify and explore the range of output options for all the available OSes
and applications.  POS G eventually had a special keystroke (Ctrl-Shift-P?) to
do an immediate screendump; this was done through a module called "SID" (for
Screen Image Dump) or, in earlier versions of POS, "CSDX" (presumably for "Canon
screen dump" or something like that).  Accent uses CPrint as well.

At the high level Pascal interface, there are only three commands:  Reset, Start
Page, and Quiet.  Reading back status is incomplete.  The Pascal code creates a
set of memory buffers that contain "bands" of up to 8 scan lines, and links
these bands together into a list of Device Control Blocks (DCBs) that mediate
the handoff of bitmap data to the microcode.  For printing, each line of text
is rendered into these memory buffers, or in the case of a screen dump, each
line from the frame buffer is pixel- and line-doubled to scale the 100dpi screen
into the 240- or 300-dpi printer frame.  To keep up with the mechanical demands
of the print engine (which must stream the bits to the laser in real time while
the page rotates around the drum as it's fed through the mechanism) the software
always maintains a minimum of two DCBs and buffers: Pascal is filling one with
new data while the microcode streams the bits to the printer from the other.

The Canon uses a DMA channel ("ExtB") to facilitate copying the data from the
current memory buffer into a 16-word deep FIFO.  The CN200 PROM is the state
machine that tracks the FIFO and issues DMA requests to keep it full as a line
is scanned.  The 9403 FIFO chips (same type used in the PERQ hard disk and
Ethernet controllers) support parallel in/serial out AND serial in/parallel out.
A bit clock is generated by a 29.4912Mhz crystal oscillator (shown as "28MHz" on
the schematic!) which shifts bits out when the VDO signal is needed.  A /16
word clock is used to reload the FIFO as the horizontal scan counts words in
the line.  The state machine issues DMA requests to transfer quad words into
the FIFOs so that the PERQ is not involved until the end of a "band" is reached.

The "Y" interrupt is used to signal an "end of band" (called "bottom of band" or
BOB in various places) condition.  At this point the microcode marks the just-
completed band as "free", then loads the next DCB in the chain and sets the
address of the next band of scanline data into the DMA registers.  The Pascal
code can then refill the empty buffers while the hardware works on shifting
out the full ones, with the only contention coming from possible processor
stalls due to DMA stealing memory cycles.  In hardware, a scanline nominally
takes from 1.797ms (300dpi) to 2.246ms (240dpi) to complete (the width of the
BD pulses, +-2%)  so the interrupt latency must be reasonably short; the minimum
time required to DMA a band with no other memory contention is nearly 0.4ms, so
Pascal buffers several bands in advance.  A missed or late band interrupt can
result in gaps, shifted or garbled output.  (In the emulator we don't actually
implement DMA cycle stealing, yet, so the CPU can run at full speed while the
printer runs.)

Other interrupts can be triggered by the printer going offline for any reason,
an end of page condition, or when the status buffer is full and available to be
read.  The status gathering is incomplete, as discussed below; the StatFull
interrupt is not fired/handled.


Paper Size
----------

One might think that a simple, clear definition of the size of a common sheet of
paper would be, in the year 2024, easily obtained from any number of online
reference sources.  And one would be tragically wrong.  In a post-truth world,
no such unequivocal definition exists for anything, anywhere, anymore.  Give up.
Everything is broken, nothing matters.

Your first hint:  "resolution" is always expressed in "dots per inch", yet the
documentation tends to define all of the page dimensions in millimeters.  It
only gets worse after that.

NO TWO SOURCES OF INFORMATION AGREE on what a "B5" page is, for example.  Or a
simple table showing the maximum printable area of a page rendered by the CX
engine, which was used in practically EVERY desktop laser printer produced by
countless vendors in the 1980s (until the SX came along to replace it).  Scour
the available documentation from Canon, Three Rivers, Apple, Wikipedia, or the
entirety of the goddamned Internet and you WILL NOT FIND two charts that show
the same numbers.  Giant Meteor, we need you NOW to end this madness.

THESE are the numbers I have settled upon, for right or wrong:

    Paper code      Width / Height      Printable Area
    ----------      -----------------   -----------------
    US Letter       8.5 x 11 (in)       8.19 x 10.86 (in)
                    216 x 279 (mm)      208 x 276 (mm)

    US Legal        8.5 x 14 (in)       8.19 x 13.85 (in)
                    216 x 356 (mm)      208 x 352 (mm)

    A4              8.27 x 11.69 (in)   8 x 11.38 (in)
                    210 x 297 (mm)      203 x 289 (mm)

    B5              6.93 x 9.84 (in)    6.9 x 9.8 (in)
                    182 x 257 (mm)      175 x 249 (mm)

Of course, it's all moot because the 3RCC software does whatever the hell it
damn well pleases, and at 240dpi just barely leaves 2mm at the top and bottom:

                    LBP-10      LBP-CX
    DPI             240         300
    HorzDots        2160        2700
    VertDots        2640        3300
    BandsBeforePage 40          10
    WordsToPrint    128         160
    TMargin         0           15
    BMargin         5           10
    LMargin         15          19
    RMargin         143         179
    MaxX            1800        2250        15 * BPI div 2 (7.5")

These printer stats are defined in PrinterUtils.pas, BUT ALSO in multiple places
in ModCPrint.pas, because of course.  ARGH.  There is no MaxY.  It is literally
NOT MENTIONED ANYWHERE HOW TO DETERMINE WHEN THE END OF PAGE IS REACHED.  Some
obscure notes in the CX documentation vaguely point to a signal in the print
engine itself (NOT exposed to the controller or interface) that acts like the
equivalent of a "visible area" in the vertical/length dimension.  NOTHING in the
Pascal, microcode, state machine or hardware seems to indicate HOW the end of a
page is determined; if the PERQ is done it just stops sending data and waits?
I'm not making this up.  Let this stand as a warning to those with a delicate
constitution or who cling to any pretense of rationality: if you start down this
path, only total madness can result.  Go now, while you still can.

That said, the current version of the PERQ software basically says "screw it,
the size of a page is always 9" x 11" and the horizontal printable area is 7.5".
That's all the guidance you get.  It makes NO sense.  Figure it out.

When they find my body it will remain unexplained how a man could punch his own
head clean off, but at least you'll know WHY.


Signals and Interface
---------------------

The Canon Video Interface is fairly simple, with five input lines, five output
lines, and two bidrectional lines.  On the PERQ, not all of these are used (see
below).  And PERQ naming is different than the Canon naming.  <facepalm/>

    Sig     Name                    Schematic       Direction (printer's view)
    /BD     BD                      I BD            Output (pulse)
    PPRDY   PRINTER POWER READY     --              Output (level)
    /RDY    READY                   I RDY L         Output (level)
    /VSREQ  VSYNC REQUEST           I TOP L         Output (level)
    /SBSY   STATUS BUSY             I PRND L        Output (level)
    /SC     STATUS/COMMAND          STATUS L        I/O (level)
    /SCLK   SERIAL CLOCK            CLK <976> L     Clock signal (I/O, pulse)
    /CBSY   COMMAND BUSY            I STATUS REQ L  Input (level)
    /PRNT   PRINT                   I PRN L         Input (level)
    /VSYNC  VERTICAL SYNC           I TOP L         Input (pulse)
    CPRDY   CONTROLLER POWER READY  --              Input (level)
    /VDO    VIDEO                   I VDO           Input (level)


The cable is also custom and contains a surprise:

   DD37 (Canon)         DB25 (PERQ)        26-pin ribbon (I/O bulkhead)
   ------------         -----------        ----------------------------
     2  /BD      ->      24  IBD-           22 AND 24!?
     3  PPRDY    ->      --  NC             --
     4  /RDY     ->       8  IRDY L         15
     5  /VSREQ   ->      10  ITOP L         19      --.
     6  /SBSY    ->       9  IPRND L        17        |
     7  /SC     <->       4  STATUS L        7        |
     8  /SCLK   <->       3  CLK 976         5        | Looped back!
     9  /CBSY   <-        6  ISTATRQST L    11        |
    10  /PRNT   <-        5  IPRN L          9        |
    11  /VSYNC  <-       10  ITOP L         19      <-'
    12  CPRDY   <-       --  NC             --
    13  /VDO    <-       13  IVDO-          25
    21  BD       ->      12  IBD+           23
    32  VDO     <-        1  IVDO+           1
                                            13  I PRFSP L (or I PFSP L)

On the Canon side, pins 1, 14-20 and 33-37 are reserved (NC).  Pins 22-31 GND.

The signal called IPFSP L (I PRFSP L on the schematic, to backplane pin J188)
is an output from the controller not wired to anything on the DB-25 cable.  Was
this supposed to be the CPRDY line?  What the hell does PFSP or PRFSP stand for?
(PFSP looks like an error on the schematic; PRFSP might be "PERQ Read From
Status Pointer" or "Status Page" or something like that?  One annotated PROM
listing says "Paper Feed"?  WHY didn't they just use the Canon signal naming!?
ARGH.)

The PERQ-Tx chassis provides a DB-25 labeled LASER PTR on the rear I/O bulkhead
and I assume that the 26-pin ribbon cable from the backplane carries the same
signals whether an OIO or MLO is installed.  The PERQ-1 uses a split cable that
breaks out the DD-50 IO Option connector on the backplane to an Ethernet AUI
and the DB-25 described above for the laser printer.  (Rare PERQ-2 chassis?)

The PERQ doesn't wire up the PPRDY or CPRDY pins at all, so it can't sense when
the printer is powered on.  Ugh.  (On the actual hardware, if your printer is
attached but not powered on when you boot the PERQ, it sees a constant stream
of interrupts, which is massively annoying.)


Command and Status bits are transmitted serially, so the Canon docs just
list them in the order sent.  I assume this means the PERQ will store them
in its "natural" bit order?

1st bit = bit 7 = 0x80
2nd bit = bit 6 = 0x40
        .
        .
8th bit = bit 0 = 0x1

This applies to the five Status codes and the transmission of Command codes.
Note that the current hardware (and emulation) doesn't use this functionality.


Limitations
-----------

What is not clear (and may never be) is whether the original LBP-10 and the CX
have the same status reporting characteristics.  The PERQ software does NOT use
any of the serial clocking to send command bytes -- the SC and SCLK pins are
wired as inputs only.  So that means it cannot solicit a specific status byte
and only seems to read whatever status byte (??) is sent by default.  Yet the
Pascal implementation lays out a single 16-bit status register that contains
bits that according to the Canon documentation would have to be spliced from
several different status registers.  Hmm.  We would have to locate the earliest
LBP-10 specific documentation, if any exists, to see what motivated 3RCC to set
up this register in this way.  One possibility is that the state machine and
microcode were simply incomplete, and the plan was to have the state machine
do command/response transactions to read all five status bytes then assemble
the resulting 16-bit status word (with the "StatFull" interrupt to signal when
the complicated sequence was complete).

    For a future enhancement to PERQemu and the POS/Accent printing
    software, a much simpler approach would be to do what they do for
    the GPIB, RS-232 or Floppy and just read/return the status bytes
    as a small block of registers and let Pascal interpret it all.

Instead, they just comment out the StatSrv routine and probably don't call it
from Pascal.  The only stats returned are from the bits read off the  wire
(/RDY, /SBSY) or generated (EOB to signal end of the linecount? and STATUS FULL,
the FIFO status) by the state machine.


Future Fun/Insanity
-------------------

Find out what the test page looked like and recreate it!  [Better still, find
the money have my two CX engines thoroughly cleaned/repaired and just print one
myself. :-(]  The CX has a button to generate a test print; add a CLI command
to "print canon test page" or something like that.  Would be extra cool if it
actually generated the page on the fly with some dynamic content like the total
page count, current date and time, PERQ configuration, etc.  Totally silly.

A future software project to improve PERQ printing support would be to add a
one-page landscape option -- a 90deg rotation using RasterOp trickery ought to
be decently fast, if I can find the algorithm and port it to Pascal or ucode.

Assuming the printable area of 8" x 10.78" (2400 x 3234 pixels @ 300dpi, or
1920 x 2587 @ 240) then two landscape pages at 1x could be printed 2-up,
horizontally, on Letter.  Rotated we could do a 2x expansion (simple, fast)
so the landscape display could print in landscape orientation, instead of the
two-pages-in-portrait-mode hack.

The standard screendump algorithm just does a 2x expansion in portrait mode,
where a 3x could work comfortably... but it takes more RAM for buffers and
the resulting pixels might look too blocky?  Anyway, at least I have some
idea of the actual maximum sizes required.  [Update:  Screendump for the CX
seems to do a 3x expansion already!!]


For PERQ 2.0, the hardware interface should a) use the real protocol to send
commands and fetch status, and b) use a larger FIFO to make it less demanding
on interrupt latency to refill the band buffer to maintain video timing.  At
300dpi a single line takes 144 words (36 quads) or 288 bytes; replacing the
four 9403s with two 256 x 8 (or even 512 x 8) chips would let the driver push
the DMA at full speed and still leave bandwidth enough for the hard disk and
Ethernet to run too.


Implementation Notes/Reference
            -or-
A Journey Into Total Insanity.
------------------------------

Canon says the output clock and dot print times are:
240 dpi:    1,192,840 Hz  =>  838.3ns
300 dpi:    1,863,813 Hz  =>  536.5ns

The OIO schematic shows a 28MHz crystal run through an 'LS393 counter to derive
a /16 bit clock, then a second 'LS393 to derive the /16 word clock.  This means
they're running the bit clock at 1.75Mhz?  But the *actual* OIO board has a
29.4912Mhz CXO, so 1.8432Mhz (~542ns bit clock)?  "Close enough."  This means
that the OIO-003 board is tuned for the 300dpi CX, rather than the older LBP10.
Hmmm.  To compute the left margin, this table appears in both Canon docs:

Paper sizes                     Left margin timing values (240 / 300)
US Letter (215.9mm x 279.4mm)   135.5us / 108.4us
A4 (210mm x 297mm)              182.2us / 145.8us
B5 (182mm x 257mm)              404.0us / 323.2us

The CX Service Manual gives 7.9us (240dpi) or 6.3us (300dpi) as the approximate
timing to add or subtract 1mm from the margin; 108.4/6.3 = 17.2 clocks, or
~0.67" (which is what the 3RCC comments indicate).  It seems there was a slight
misinterpretation of the time->width conversion (or some variation in the chip
timings in the clock circuit on the board).

SO, we take the margin register as a count of word clocks at the approximate
clock rate and figure out how many actual pixels/bytes to skip, NOT just as a
byte count!  Doh.  This is roughly the 't' count for a 5-8mm margin ("typical"
per Canon docs).

(LMargin * word clock / bit time)              
---------------------------------
                8

or, simply LMargin * 2. :-) to get the starting byte for drawing the scanline.

Canon docs don't definitively specify the actual maximum printable area anywhere!
The Apple LaserWriter (LBP-CX) says:

Letter:  8.0 x 10.78 in         = 203.2 x 273.8 mm (printable)
Legal:   6.75 x 12.84 in (!!)   = 171.4 x 326.1 mm
A4:      7.41 x 10.86 in        = 188.2 x 275.8 mm
B5:      7.69 x 10.16 in        = 195.3 x 258.1 mm

(The LBP-SX based LW IINT says legal is 8 x 13.78 in, so that's probably
the actual printable size but the original LW lacked RAM?  Who knows.)

MORE guesswork, from the MAME src (lwriter.cpp):

    // A guess based on not very much
    static constexpr unsigned FB_HEIGHT = 3434;
    static constexpr unsigned FB_WIDTH = 2520;

Top margin (BandsBeforePage + TMargin * 8 lines per band, presumably) has to
take "more than 212ms after VSYNC before VDO is valid" (per spec).  For LBP-10,
then, 212ms / 2.246us is ~94 lines (0.393") of top margin imposed by the print
engine; LBP-CX is 212ms / 1.797us is ~117 lines, or 0.393" @ 300lpi as well.
The microcode counts off top margins based on the PrinterDefs TMargin values in
a count of BD pulses, then adds to it -- but I hold in my hands a page printed
on the actual hardware that defies this:  1/8" top and 1/16" bottom margins,
which would mean a 3.175mm top margin or just ~66ms delay which would clearly
violate the timing spec.  Does the BD clock start *before* VSREQ/VSYNC to allow
for the paper pickup time?  Who the hell knows?  NONE of these numbers ever seem
to line up.  Ugh.

All the CX service manual shows is that the area where the VMSK signal (internal
to the uproc driving the engine) is active is between a 2mm top and bottom
blanking area.  That would _seem_ to be the hardware-enforced top and bottom
margin; left seems to be 3mm and right 7mm, but it's not clear if that's face
up or down?  I'm guessing the right margin is wider because the paper pickup/
jam detect sensors are on that side?  Who knows?  The doc says that "in a table
below" the print area specs for all four paper trays are given but this table
doesn't exist.  Yay.

PERQ microcode has some notion (for the CX) of a maximum number of lines (3300,
hard coded) but the Pascal code always computes the maximum ScansPerPage at 
11 * DPI (so, 11" x resolution - (top + bottom margins) * 8 (BandS, a const).
Thus, for the CX, 3300 - ((10 + 15 + 10) * 8) = 3020 (10.06").  That doesn't
match the Apple spec (10.78" for US Letter, 10.86" for A4) but "close enough".
Similarly, the 240dpi LBP-10 spec would be 2400 - ((40 + 5) * 8) = 2280 (9.5"),
but the 240dpi CX and the 240dpi LBP-10 (different engines, same interface) may
have had slightly different limits?  Sigh.


! Define IOB adresses for Canon printer interface hardware

Constant(LineCount,204);         ! load with ones complement of lines per band
Constant(MarginCntl,224);        ! send this port a '3' before loading margins
Constant(LeftMar,225);           ! load with ones complement of blank words
Constant(RightMar,226);          ! load with ones complement of line length
                                 ! in words
Constant(CanonCntl,205);         ! five bit control for printer functions

! addresses for Interrupt status info

Constant(IntStat,10);            ! four bit interrupt status
Constant(MechStat,11);           ! sixteen bit printer mechanical status

! Define interrupt bits in IntStat port

Constant(BOB,            1);     ! Bit 0 => Bottom Of Band interrupt
Constant(IPRend,         2);     ! Bit 1 => End of Page interrupt
Constant(IReady,         4);     ! bit 2 => Printer fault interrupt
Constant(StatFull,      10);     ! Bit 3 => mechanical status available

! sense of interrupt bits is as follows:
!
!   BOB = 1       ==>  NOT Bottom Of Band
!   IPRend = 1    ==>  NOT End of Page
!   IReady = 1    ==>  Printer is NOT read (i.e., there is a FAULT)
!   StatFull = 1  ==>  Mechanical Status NOT available.


! Define bits for CanonCntl control port

Constant(CcNotBlank,1);          ! Bit 0 => print blank band (active LOW)
Constant(CcNotReset,2);          ! Bit 1 => reset the interface (active LOW)
Constant(CcEnbVideo,4);          ! Bit 2 => start printing a page (active hi)
Constant(CcStatRead,10);         ! Bit 3 => read status & generate STATFULL
                                 !     interrupt (active hi)
Constant(CcEnbInt,20);           ! Bit 4 => enable interrupt (active hi)


! Define CanonCntl bit combinations

Constant(ResetCntl,  CcEnbInt);                                 ! Reset the interface
Constant(GetReadyCntl, (CcEnbInt or CcNotReset));               ! Get the printer ready
Constant(BlankCntl,  (CcEnbInt or CcNotReset));                 ! Print a blank band
Constant(NormalCntl, (CcEnbInt or CcNotReset or CcNotBlank));   ! Print a band
Constant(StartCntl,  (CcEnbInt or CcEnbVideo or CcNotReset));   ! Start printer
Constant(StatusCntl, (CcEnbInt or CcStatRead or CcNotReset));   ! Request mechanical status
Constant(QuietCntl, CcNotReset);                                ! Turn off interrupts


Version 5.0 of Canon.MicroMac is the latest.  We have versions from 2.0-4.2 as
well.  See ~/PERQ/Tapes/2014090117/Layered/canon/.


Only three commands to implement?  Reset, StartPage, Quiet

Reset:
    sends command to controller, waits a cycle, reads back status

StartPage:
    sends a (literal) 3 to MarginCntl, nop
    sends 1s compl of the left margin count, nop
    sends 1s comp of the right margin
    <addr trans, several cycles>
    sets the linecount
    sends StartCntl to CanonCntl (asserts PRNT)

Quiet:
    sends QuietCntl to CanonCntl    turns off interrupts

That's it for commands!  Interrupt service:

Canon (Y) interrupt:
    reads IntStat (low 4 bits), followed by 8 nops?
    then does a vector through a local table to catch continuous interrupts (fault)
    but.  it uses intrpend.  after clearing the register.  this must be to catch
    the specific case where Y fires continuously until it's shut off?  weird.

ChkStat:
    called to check/jump on IReady, IPREnd; StatFull isn't implemented!
    BOB interrupt isn't either?!?  both fall through to BOBSrv?

FaultSrv:
    sends StatusCntl to CanonCntl
    sets the status var
    sends QuietCntl to CanonCntl
    exits via IntDone

    I'm assuming the StatusCntl command is intended to read the printer status
    registers and interrupt when all the bits have been read (and assembled into
    one 16-bit reg, NOT n separate ones), setting StatusFull to interrupt when
    ready -- but StatSrv is commented out

StatSrv:
    yep, reads the MechStat reg and saves it, exits via IntDone

EOPSrv:
    end of page interrupt sets status and exits via IntDone

BOBSrv:
    "bottom of band" (NOT Beginning!) resets LineCount reg
    counts off top margin lines (down to zero)
    if blank, jumps to PrintBlank, otherwise sets up DMA for a filled band
    once addrs set, sends a NormalCntl to CanonCntl
    does some DCB housekeeping and returns via IntDone


PrintBlank:
    sends a StartCntl to CanonCntl and exits via IntDone
    this just counts off time during the top/bottom(?) margins with the video
    output disabled(?) so it's more aptly named VerticalBlank not PrintBlank


"end of page" seems to be completely non-deterministic.  my hack solution is to
count the supposed maximum number of clock pulses for the paper size (even though
3300 seems to be hardcoded for the CX regardless).


Multi-page / continuous output timing
-------------------------------------

According to the Video Interface document, the print engine is rated for 8.1
pages per minute (6.9 ppm, legal size) -- but the timing in the CX Service doc
says INTR + PRINT + LSTR times are "about" 20.7 seconds for a single page, so
the best case is around 6ppm if the 8.6 seconds for print time (9.9 for Legal)
is true.  INTR (initial drum rotation) + LSTR (last rotation) aside, these
timings can't possibly allow for 8ppm on a CX.  Which is insane, because the
machine was literally marketed as the LBP-8/CX and the older LBP-10 was 8ppm.

For mechanical timing, I'm ignoring the ~120 sec wait time at power on since the
PERQ can't detect the PPRDY signal.  We'll always assume the printer starts in
Standby mode.

My timing model (simplified) will be something like:

    [1] Standby state
        If there's a cassette loaded and paper available, RDY is true and the
        printer is Sensing.  (If no paper, RDY remains false and the status 1
        word indicates Paper Out.)

        Assuming RDY is true, controller asserts PRNT; "warm up" time is ~5
        seconds (INTR in "accurate" mode), transitioning to Ready state.

        [To support multi-page, Standby->Ready initializes the list of output
        pages, assuming TIFF output]

    [2] Ready state
        If PRNT is true we are starting or continuing: schedule the next VSREQ 
        for +3.7 sec (since INTR is complete and the drum is spinning).

        If PRNT is false, we schedule the return to standby mode at around 5.7
        seconds after printing completes (to account for LSTR).  Realistically
        this is more like 10ish seconds, where the unit lowers the heater temp
        and stops the drum and scanner.  [If the full command set is implemented
        the software could keep the drum/scanner going to reduce startup delay
        for short pauses between pages, but Canon doesn't recommend keeping the
        engine running/idle for excessively long periods to reduce mechanical
        wear.]

        There is a ~3.7 second window after print goes false where we return to
        sensing?  Thus rendering delays shouldn't split a long run into multiple
        files, but conversely we don't want a huge delay to incorrectly merge
        separate prints into one.
        
        If PRNT is true, Sensing goes false and PaperFeed goes true; schedule
        VSREQ for < 3.7 seconds (to maintain full throughput).  Canon's docs
        tie paper feed _directly_ to assertion of PRNT (within some ill-/un-
        defined time) and the next page is sensed/fed as early as half way down
        the current page.  UGH.)

        BD must start n lines *before* VSREQ to count off the top margin; the
        microcode counts BOB interrupts until "BandsBeforeTop + TMargin" reaches
        zero.  BUT the state machine doesn't even transition to processing BOB
        interrupts until AFTER VSREQ is asserted, so... the TMargin count in the
        microcode is always wrong?  But the top margin for CPrint output is right
        at the top of the printable area, while SID/CSDX counts too many lines?
        Head -> desk impact -> raise -> repeat.

    [3] VSREQ -> Waiting for VSYNC state
        Here we are signalling we're at top of page and ready to start to the
        controller; VSYNC is automatic so we introduce a short delay to allow
        the VSREQ/VSYNC "pulse" shapes to be expressed for the state machine to
        transition.

    [4] VSYNC -> Printing state
        At VSYNC we start the BD clock, I think.  This is NOT clear!  At VSYNC +
        n we start Sensing again.  Spec says PRNT is "don't care" from assertion
        of VSYNC to "less than 3.5s" (or 4.6s for legal paper), so we start
        Sensing again in the middle of the page to see if another one is coming
        right away.  The PERQ seems to maintain PRNT=true (ccVidEnable) for at
        least n scanlines, so maybe we just let the microcode timing toggle our
        Sensing pin?

        Printing continues through the pre-defined count of BD pulses.  This is
        roughly what the (internal) VMSK signal in the print engine does?  It's
        the video equivalent of the "visible" field between front/back porches.
        Fills in the current page.

    [5] Printing -> EOP
        This is where things get squirrelly.  The EOP interrupt is problematic
        since the microcode doesn't seem to expect it normally?  If a short page
        is printed, the microcode just stops sending data and waits for the next
        VSREQ?  Signally an EOP interrupt can actually confuse CPrint and cause
        retransmission of pages, which is annoying (and wrong).  But it also is
        waiting for SOME kind of final interrupt because sometimes it will hang
        until it's received before returning to POS.  Sigh.

        If output format is PNG (single page) we flush the file at EOP.  For
        multi-page, we should already know if another is incoming, but there's
        no special processing needed to end a Page; return to Ready.  If not,
        go back to Idle?

    [6] Flush, Return to Standby
        For multi-page support, accommodate brief controller resets/delays by
        waiting to close the file until the "return to standby" timer fires.
        This is where we walk the list of IFDs to fix up the offsets, write the
        page numbers, and flush the final output.

I suppose the critical insight here is that print engine timing is mechanically
driven; the time it takes to image the page is NOT the time required for a sheet
to traverse the path from input tray -> processing -> output.  Canon's own docs
are wildly inconsistent; "first rotation" to printing to "last rotation" can be
10-20 seconds, which is nowhere near the ~7.5 seconds necessary to maintain the
8.1/6.9ppm advertised page throughput.  ARGH.


"Accurate" mode (RateLimit.PrinterSpeed set):

    Standby -> Ready
        Max 6.3 seconds     (tiny/no delay if not rate limiting)
        Or 5.0 seconds??    (Initial rotation)
        From PRNT true

    Ready -> VSREQ
        Max 3.7 seconds _from PRNT asserted!_
        (trim this delay if not rate limiting)
        BD starts BEFORE VSREQ!  For 240dpi, ~.72 seconds (320 lines, 40 bands)
        This seems off; it's probably more like 296 lines (37 bands) since there
        is about a 3mm top margin on the hardcopy...
        @ 300dpi, .144 seconds (80 lines, 10 bands) + 40 (TMargin) == 216ms!!

    VSREQ -> VSYNC
        Max 5ms (pulse width 10ms)
        irrelevant for the PERQ

    VSYNC -> EOP
        BD clocks * max lines = ~5.94 sec, ~7.56 sec (legal)
        (True for BOTH models!  Engine speed is calibrated to BD pulses which
        differs according to resolution, duh!)  Have to maintain this pulse
        timing to allow the microcode/Pascal the time it needs to produce the
        output bands (even when cheating the DMA)
        YET the spec says BD is guaranteed "correct" from 6.52 seconds after
        VSYNC, so that would generate around 12.09" (either dpi) of horizontal
        clocks -- NOT enough to have a Legal print area of 13.68".  WTF CANON.

    EOP -> Ready (next VSREQ)
        Only 1.5 sec between end of page and VSREQ during continuous printing
        to maintain 8.1ppm (or 1.13 sec for legal for 6.9ppm)  (this delay is
        accounted for in the Ready->VSREQ state)  but there MUST be a minimum
        span between VSREQ/VSYNC because the printer doesn't buffer the data,
        so again, WTF CANON.

        VSYNC + 3.5sec (4.6 legal): poll PRNT; if TRUE, it must remain so thru
        the next VSYNC pulse!  if FALSE, and it remains FALSE for >5.3 sec, we
        return to Standby.  if FALSE, but it transitions back to TRUE within
        8.2 seconds of the last one, we continue (the drum does not spin down).
        So the "sensing" period is from 3.5/4.6sec after VSYNC to 8.2 sec, and
        VSREQ has to respect a MINIMUM time of ~7.2 sec (max throughput @ 8ppm)
        and a MAXIMUM time of ~8.2 sec (or we go back into standby).  UGH.

        BD is really the problematic one, though.  It just doesn't match with
        any *actual hardcopies from the hardware.*
            LBP-10 BBP is 40 with 0 for TMargin, 5 BMar -- but the actual
            printout is ~3mm top and ~2mm bottom -- so right to the limits!
            approx 28 lines top margin means 37 BD pulses or 296 lines are
            counted off to account for the hardware's 212ms start delay from
            VSync to VDO (including left margin processing on the first line)

            CX BBP is 10 with 5 for TMar, 10 BMar, but the microcode actually
            counts lines/bands, so 10 bands (80 lines) would occur before
            VSReq, then the microcode would count off 5 bands (40 lines) to
            meet the 212ms "requirement" before first valid VDO.  Naturally,
            NONE of these timings actually work if you cross reference ANY
            two documents, code, or physical samples of printed output from
            the actual hardware.  <chews_off_own_leg>


Return to standby time can be tuned or a CLI command could be explicitly added
to give the user direct control over output of multi-page documents, though to
generate Bitsavers-compatible CCITT G4 compressed PDFs they'll have to be run
through "tumble" anyway... for now. :-)

---
Last update: skeezics   Tue Feb 13 15:12:46 PST 2024
  